---
published: true
layout: single_post
date: "2016-06-01"
categories: music
image: girraffes_girraffes.jpg
author: Nick
title: Math Rock
---
"*What's missing from pop music is danger.*"    
-Prince

After listening to countless varying types of music over my 20ish year music listening history, a good deal of music sort of all starts to blur together into an indistinguishable pulp. <br/>

Combine the common ABABCB structure, the similar instruments, effects, rhythym, and the vague abstract lyrics... you get the concept of "Music as furniture".  

It's just there. It makes me comfortable. It keeps my ass from hurting.

<!--more-->

Don't get me wrong there's quality pop music being released consistently, stuff I listen to on a regular basis, stuff that's enjoyable.

The artist has good style, the music is entertaining, the conversation about it is interesting, I sing along to it when no one is in the car, and life goes on.

However, there are times..   
times deep inside..  
when I yearn.  

Much like a middle aged house wife, I yearn for something new and exciting.   
I yearn for more than what I've settled for with this mundane music industry.  
 
I yearn for my ass to feel good AND my soul to be inspired. 

That's why it was refreshing for me to discover, not just a new band, but an new GENRE of fresh juicy musical  .  
(I know Math Rock has been around forever but I'm just discovering it because I'm not hipster like that.)

## [Math Rock](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Math_rock)

~~~
Math rock is a rhythmically complex, guitar-based style of experimental rock that emerged in the late 1980s. It is characterized by complex, atypical rhythmic structures (including irregular stopping and starting), angular melodies, and dissonant chords.
~~~

I'd say another good description for math rock is: extremely soft progressive metal.  


First up is **Girrafes? Girrafes!**

This band and this song was what got me into some Math Rock.     
The intro to this song is a complex guitar riff over some syncopated drums in an usual time signature (3/4?).   
The song progresses for just over a min then suddenly drops off into just a mellow guitar chord progression.   
This progression is repeated for several bars, no drums, just a beautiful harmonious cliff we're hanging off of wondering what's about to happen.  
Then the lead guitarist and drummer explode over the chords and go hard for the rest of the song.  

What's incredibly interesting from a technical perspective is the fact that the guitarist is using a loop pedal to create all the other musicians parts.  
So in reality....this entire band and all of it's harmonic, rythmic, and melodic complexity...is only two people.  
Check out some of their live videos to see some musician virtuosity.

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/JZqZCS0rCmE" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>


<br/>
Next: **This Town Needs Guns**  
I heard about this band a long time ago from a roomie I had in grad school.  
I got to watch my room-mate progress over the span of two semesters from a low level marijuana dealer to a cocaine dealer.   
He was a go getter and moved to the top of the street pharmaceutical industry very quickly.   
Being that he was from Slidell it wasn't a surprise that he took to it so well, however, I ended up moving out when one of my roomate's business associates named Nitro was visiting and handed me a bag of something to look at.  
It was crack of course, and when I tried to give it back to him he said it's yours now, you owe me 40 bucks.  
But I digress. 
Aside from learning some profound lessons about living with drug dealers while trying to attend grad school I learnt about this band. 

This band is from Canada, they've been around for quite some time and have changed members once or twice.  
Their style ranges from very mellow to slightly less mellow.   
They are instrumentally very poly rythmic yet still melodious which they somehow manage to pull off.   
What I find fascinating is how the singer has to adapt his singing to these complex songs.     
It's interesting the hear the creativity in the vocal melodies.  
I reccommend this song **Baboon** and **If I Sit Still, Maybe I'll Get Out Of Here** as the two most accessible songs to beginning listeners.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/de1bt5dc2t0?list=RDde1bt5dc2t0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<br/>
So I know I may have hyped up Math Rock like it was the most amazing thing since VR Porn but in all actuality those bands are all I've really gotten into as far as Math Rock is concerned.   
I tried listening to some other math rock bands and they were all a little...extravangant.  
Math Rock is deff worth further explorations when I have the time, but for now it's back to the same old mundane music industry that I've been with since high school.   
That's it for now.
Best of you luck to you and your future explorations into the world of Math Rock!
